# Meeting Link

[Join us on Zoom](https://zoom-lfx.platform.linuxfoundation.org/meeting/92376999403?password=23e83ac5-4334-4da3-9e07-2afb5065fa28)

# Reminder

- meeting agenda process
  - The meeting chair or other host creates an agenda/notes PR
  - Anyone can update the PR to add agenda items (make sure you are on the PR branch, e.g., agenda-2026-04-22).
  - Host or someone will add notes during the meeting.
  - The PR will be committed after the meeting.

# Agenda and Notes

- [x] **CoIP-1 merged?**
  - today!
- [x] **Vote on CoIP-2: Events**
  - Parisa will ask you to review it at some point within a week.
  - type of `log(e)`:
    - option A: `log(e)` has type `[]` --> agreed upon
    - option B: `log(e)` returns `e` and has the type of `e`. `x = e` and ` x += e` (`x.write(e)` and `x.inc()`) both have type of `e` and return `e`.
    - option C: `log(e)` returns `e` and has the type of `e`. `x = e` and ` x += e` has type `[]`.
    - option D: `log(e)` has type `[]`. `x = e` and ` x += e` both have type of `e` and return `e`.
  - suggestion: call it `publish` but from a crypto point of view that might not be a good choice
  - suggestion: `logEvent` or `emitEvent`. rejected.
    - going with `emit`.
  - pure and proof of `log(e)`, definition of pure and when we need proof
    - `provableCircuits`: when do we generate a proof for?
      - what we generate impact code for.
    - `pureCircuits`: a call to `emit` makes a circuit impure.
- [x] **Release internal versions of Compact runtime and compiler for feature development based on downstream components' needs**
  - Compact js needs Compact runtime at least internally released, e.g., compact-runtime 0.14.103
  - Toolkit and node CI prefer a public release of Compact compiler
  - unstable binaries that we make available to the teams
  - Parisa follow up: can they just take an unstable binary? 
  - alternatively we increase the frequency of our releases
- [x] **Where should release handbook live? Shielded git, compact git, other options?**
  - developer docs subdir.
  - Confluence is going away. If you have any pages of importance start moving them somewhere else.


# Recordings

[Recordings are available on the LF Decentralized Trust Calendar](https://zoom-lfx.platform.linuxfoundation.org/meetings/lf-decentralized-trust)

# Next meeting

[Please check the calendar](https://zoom-lfx.platform.linuxfoundation.org/meetings/lf-decentralized-trust)

# TSC Members Attending

- [x] Parisa Ataei
- [x] Joseph Denman
- [x] Kent Dybvig
- [x] Kevin Millikin
