---
CoIP: 1
Title: Compact Improvement Proposal Process
Authors:
  - Bob Blessing-Hartley (bobblessinghartley)
  - Kevin Millikin (kmillikin)
Status: Draft
Category: Process
Created: 2026-01-21
Requires: none
Replaces: none 
---

<!--
 This file is part of Compact.
 Copyright (C) 2026 Minokawa project contributors
 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
 Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
 you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
 You may obtain a copy of the License at

     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 limitations under the License. 

 Some portions of this work were adapted from the Midnight Improvement
 Proposal (MIP) process, which is covered by the following copyright notice:
 
 > Copyright 2025 Midnight Foundation
 
 > Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
 > you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
 > You may obtain a copy of the License at
 
 >     https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 
 > Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 > distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 > WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 > See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 > limitations under the License.
-->

## Abstract

A Compact Improvement Proposal (CoIP) is a formalised design document for the Compact community, and also the name of the process by which such documents are produced and listed.
A CoIP provides information or describes a change to the Compact programming language, tooling, or development processes concisely and in sufficient technical detail.
In this CoIP, we explain what a CoIP is, how the CoIP process functions, the role of the Compact Technical Steering Committee (TSC), and how users should go about proposing, discussing, and structuring a CoIP.

The Minokawa project intends CoIPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing new features, collecting community input on an issue, and documenting design decisions that have gone into Compact.
Plus, because CoIPs are text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of significant changes affecting Compact.

## Motivation

CoIPs aim to address two challenges mainly:

- The need for various parties to agree on a common design in order to create interoperable tools or interfaces.
- The need to propose and discuss changes to the Compact language, tooling, or processes.

The CoIP process does not *by itself* offer any form of governance.
For example, it does not govern the process by which proposed changes to the Compact programming language are implemented and deployed.
Yet, it is a crucial, community-driven component of the governance decision pipeline as it helps to collect thoughts and proposals in an organised fashion.
Additionally, specific projects may choose to actively engage with the CoIP process for some or all changes to their project.

The process detailed herein is intentionally lightweight and is expected to evolve as the Compact community grows.
This document outlines the technical structure of the CoIP and the technical requirements of the submission and review process. 

## Specification

### Process Overview

The Compact Improvement Proposal (CoIP) process consists of the following stages:

1. **Idea formulation:** An idea for an improvement is conceived.
   Simple improvements (like performance improvements or better error messages) and bug fixes generally do not need a CoIP.
   These can be submitted directly to the [Compact issue tracker](https://github.com/LFDT-Minokawa/compact/issues) instead.
   Bigger improvements first start with an idea.
   This could be a Compact feature request or arise out of other discussion.
   In any case, it's a good idea to vet the idea publicly in some way to gauge if it fits a genuine need and is likely to be acceptable.
   It's **very** important that proposed changes are well-motivated.
   Adding features and changing implementations has a cost, which must be justified by a corresponding benefit.

1. **CoIP drafting:** A formal CoIP document is created.
   This is a document that follows the template structure in `coip-template.md`.
   The authors must create an [LFDT-Minokawa/compact](https://github.com/LFDT-Minokawa/compact) pull request (PR) where the CoIP document is added to the `coips` subdirectory.
   The name of the document must be `coip-xxxx.md` (those are literal `x`'s).
   The status of the CoIP in the document header must be **Draft**.
   If the proposal has accompanying resources, such as images, they should be added to a subdirectory of `coips` with the same basename as the CoIP filname
   (so for draft CoIPs before numbering, this directory is `coips/coip-xxxx`).
   To signal that the CoIP is ready for the TSC to consider numbering it, assign the TSC chair as a reviewer and mention them in a PR comment.
   (This signal is explicit so the TSC doesn't accidentally consider numbering the CoIP before the authors are ready.)

1. **TSC numbering of the draft:** The TSC considers the draft CoIP PR, and assigns a number if it's acceptable (as a draft).
   Note that this is **not** the same as acceptance of the CoIP itself.
   The TSC will vote to merge the draft CoIP PR at one of their next regularly scheduled meetings.
   They will ensure that the document is correctly formatted, that it is clear and understandable, and that it is well motivated.
   The TSC will be generally lenient at this stage with the understanding that problems can be addressed before the CoIP is eventually submitted.
   If the TSC deems the CoIP is not yet ready for numbering, it will be sent back to the authors with specific feedback.
   If the TSC approves numbering the CoIP, they will assign it a number and update the document by pushing to the PR.
   The TSC will update the filename and the number in the document and add the CoIP as a draft to the index in `coips/README.md`.
   The TSC will then merge the CoIP.  The TSC may add the authors as code owners for their file and subdirectory.

1. **Discussion and update:** The CoIP authors finish the draft and address feeedback to get it in shape for submission.
   Discussion should happen in some public forum, such as the LFDT or Midnight Discord server.
   The Compact issue tracker can be used to raise and track issues with the CoIP.
   Contributors can submit pull requests to improve the draft CoIP.  (Note that the CoIP authors may not have the ability to merge such PRs.)

1. **Submission:** When ready, the CoIP authors submit it to the TSC for consideration.
   The CoIP authors do this by filing an issue in the Compact repository, asking for the TSC to consider the CoIP for acceptance.
   The issue should be assigned to the TSC chair.
   The TSC will set the status of the CoIP to **Submitted** and mark it as submitted in the index in `coips/README.md`.
   There should be no more substantive modifications to the document.
   (Small changes like spelling and punctuation fixes are OK.)

1. **Review and Discussion:** The community and TSC review and discuss the CoIP.
   The TSC will announce a period of community commentary, which usually will last at least two weeks.
   They will announce by posting in the CoIP submission issue (from the previous stage) that they will discuss the CoIP at a specific regularly scheduled TSC meeting after the commentary period has passed.

1. **TSC decision:** The TSC decides to approve the CoIP or not.
   The TSC will vote to accept (status **Accepted**) or reject (status **Rejected**) the CoIP.
   At this point the authors' job is done (as authors, they can still contribute to implementation).
   The TSC will update the CoIP document and the index in `coips/README.md` to reflect the status.

1. **Implementation:** Accepted CoIPs are implemented by development teams.
   The TSC's acceptance represents a decision for the project to adopt the proposed improvement.
   For language features or tooling improvements, this requires contributors to actually plan and perform the implementation work.
   For process improvements, it requires us to take steps to adopt the process.
   When implementation is completed the CoIP's status is changed to **Implemented** by the TSC.
   (They might do this by approving a PR from the implementers to change the status.)

1. **Release:** Implemented changes make it into a released version of the Compact language or tools.
   The Compact release managers will make releases of the language and tools.
   Implemented changes will not necessarily make it into the very next release.
   For example, a breaking language change might have to wait for a planned major version increment,
   or a language change might require updates to blockchain or other components.
   When an implemented CoIP makes it into a release, the status is changed to **Released** and the release version is noted (for example, **Released in Compact language 1.7**).

### CoIP Categories

CoIPs are categorized to help organize and manage the different types of proposals:

- **Process:** Proposals related to the way that the Compact project is run (such as versioning, releases, documentation management, etc.), including project governance.
- **Language:** Changes to the Compact language (including the standard libraries) and its implementation (such as the API of generated JavaScript code, use of Impact and ZKIR, etc.).
- **Tooling:** Proposals to add or modify the Compact suite of tools.
- **Informational:** Provides general information, guidelines, or research related to the Compact but does not propose a specific change.

### CoIP Statuses

CoIPs can have the following statuses mentioned in the Process Overview above:

- **Draft:** The CoIP has been sent as a PR to the Compact repository, is merged, and is undergoing writing and revision.
- **Submitted:** A draft CoIP has been submitted to the TSC for consideration.
  Writing and revision are done.
- **Accepted:** The TSC has voted to accept a submitted CoIP.
  For accepted informational CoIPs, this is the final status.
- **Rejected:** The TSC has voted to reject a submitted CoIP.
- **Implemented:** The improvement described in the CoIP has been implemented.
  For accepted process CoIPs, this is the final status.
- **Released:** The implemented improvement has made it into a release of the language or tools.
  For accepted language and tooling CoIPs, this is the final status.

In addition, there are other statuses that are special in that they represent events occurring outside the normal process described above:

- **Superseded:** A newer CoIP replaces this CoIP.
  The newer (accepted) CoIP explicitly does this by including as part of the proposal that it supercedes the superceded CoIP ("Supercedes CoIP-1234", for instance).
- **Obsolete:** The CoIP is no longer considered relevant.
  The TSC will occasionally vote to label CoIPs this way for clarity.
- **Withdrawn:** The authors have withdrawn the CoIP.
  This can happen at any time before the TSC votes to accept or reject the CoIP.

#### Submission

When a draft CoIP is "finished" to the authors' satisfaction, it should be submitted by filing an issue in the [Compact issue tracker](https://github.com/LFDT-Minokawa/compact/issues).
The issue should specify the CoIP number and ask the TSC to formally consider it for acceptance.
The issue should be assigned to the TSC chair.
The TSC will announce the commentary period and when they will vote on the proposal.
After submission to the TSC for consideration, the CoIP should not be substantially altered.

#### Review and Discussion

Once a CoIP is submitted, it enters a period of public review and discussion.
Feedback is encouraged from all Compact community members.
Discussion should take place on the GitHub issue or by attending a Compact TSC meeting.
Technical experts may be consulted for specific aspects of the proposal.

#### Implementation

Once a CoIP is accepted, it becomes a candidate for implementation.
Engineering teams (Shielded architects & engineers, community contributors) will implement the changes specified in the CoIP.

### Artifacts and Tools

- **CoIP Document:** The core artifact is the CoIP document itself, written in Markdown and stored in the Compact repository.
- **CoIP Template:** A standardized Markdown template for creating CoIPs (see below).
- **GitHub Repository:** The `coips` subdirectory (in the Compact repository) on GitHub will be used to:
    - Store all CoIP documents.
    - Track the status of each CoIP.
    - Facilitate discussion through PRs and issues.
- **Discussion Forums:** The Compact issue tracker and the LFDT and Midnight Discord servers should be used for broader discussions and early-stage idea sharing. 
- **Meeting Notes:** Notes from any meetings related to CoIP discussions should be publicly available in this GitHub repository or linked from it.

### Technical Steering Committee

The CoIP process relies on the Technical Steering Committee (TSC) to act as the CoIP editors, to manage the process, ensure quality, and facilitate community discussion.

#### Role and Responsibilities

The TSC is responsible for:

- Ensuring that CoIPs adhere to the CoIP template and meet the minimum quality standards (e.g., clarity, completeness, technical soundness).
- Assigning CoIP numbers.
- Tracking the progress of CoIPs.
- Facilitating community discussion and helping to resolve technical disagreements.
- Voting to accept or reject a CoIP.
- Maintaining the CoIPs in the Compact repository, including an index of them and their statuses.

### CoIP Template

All CoIP documents must follow [this Markdown template](coip-template.md) and include the YAML front matter.
